What is Memory Forensics?

Memory forensics is the analysis of the volatile memory that is in use when a computer is powered on. Computers use dedicated storage devices called 
Random Access Memory (RAM) to remember what is being performed on the computer at the time. RAM is extremely quick and is the preferred method of 
storing and accessing data. However, it is limited compared to storage devices such as hard drives. This type of data is volatile because it will be 
deleted when the computer is powered off. RAM stores data such as your clipboard or unsaved files. 

We can analyse a computer's memory to see what applications (processes), what network connections were being made, and many more useful pieces of 
information. For example, we can analyse the memory of a computer infected with malware to see what the malware was doing at the time.


Why is Memory Forensics Useful?

Memory forensics is an extremely important element when investigating a computer. A memory dump is a full capture of what was happening on the 
Computer at the time, for example, network connections or things running in the background. Most of the time, malicious code attempts to hide from 
the user. However, it cannot hide from memory.

We can use this capture of the memory for analysis at a later date, especially as the memory on the computer will eventually be lost (if, for example, 
we power off the computer to prevent malware from spreading). By analysing the memory, we can discover exactly what the malware was doing, who it was 
contacting, and such forth.


Introduction to Processes.

At the simplest, a process is a running program. For example, a process is created when running an instance of notepad. You can have multiple processes for an application (for example, running three instances of notepad will create three processes). This is important to know because being able to determine what processes were running on the computer will tell us what applications were running at the time of the capture.

On Windows, we can use Task Manager to view and manage the processes running on the computer.


On a computer, processes are usually categorised into two groups:



Category					Description							Example


User Processes			These processes are programs that the user has launched.	notepad.exe - this is a text editor that is launched 
				For example, text editors, web browsers, etc.				      by the user.


Background Process		These processes are automatically launched and managed by 	dwm.exe - this is an essential process for Windows that
				the Operating System and are often essential to the		is responsible for displaying windows and applications 
				Operating System behaving correctly.				on the computer.











